(tinkling music)
(keyboard clicking)
Alright so, what is a heap?
Well, a heap is a complete binary tree
that satisfies the heap property,
so let's look at those two requirements.
So, it's a complete binary tree,
and remember that for a binary tree,
every node in the tree can have zero, one or two children.
And it has to be a complete tree,
and we went over what that means in an earlier video.
It means that every level of the tree is full,
except potentially the last level.
And on the last level,
if it's not complete, meaning that every leaf's parent
doesn't have two children, so if there's any space
at that bottom level, the existing leaves all
have to be as far to the left as possible,
and we'll go over the visual of this in a few slides.
So the first requirement is that a heap
is a complete binary tree.
The second requirement is
that it must satisfy the heap property,
and that heap property will depend
on whether we're talking about a max heap or a min heap.
With a max heap, every parent has
to have a value greater than or equal to its children,
and in a min heap, every parent has to have a value
that is less than or equal to its children.
And so there are two types,
max heap and min heap.
And so, as I said, a binary heap must be a complete tree
and we call them binary heaps because they're binary trees.
When we're creating a heap, we add children at each level
from left to right.
So if we were adding a bunch of values into an empty heap,
the first value would become the root,
the second value would become the left child of the root,
the third value would become the right child of the root,
and then we'd move down to the next level,
and so the fourth value would become the left child
of the left child of the root,
and the fifth value would become the right child
of the left child of the root.
And we'll go through a visual of this in a couple of slides.
They're usually implemented as a raise,
and so we saw an implementation of a binary tree
that uses classes, that uses a tree class
and a tree-node class.
Well, when you have a complete binary tree,
you can actually back them by a raise,
and that's how heaps are usually implemented.
And our implementation will use an array
so you can see how that works.
Now, because of the heap property,
the maximum or minimum value will always be
at the root of the tree and that's why heaps exist.
If you're wondering, well what's the big deal
about complete trees that satisfy the heap property,
it's because the maximum value in the case of a max heap,
or the minimum value in the case of a min heap
will always be at the root.
And so you can get the minimum or maximum value
in constant time, because accessing the root
is a constant time operation.
Now, when we insert a node into a tree,
we generally add it to the bottom level
because, as I've said, when you're building a tree
you start at the top and then you move to the next level
and add nodes left to right,
and then to the next level and add nodes left to right.
And so when we add a node to an already existing tree,
we add it at the first available spot at the bottom level,
but of course once we've done that,
the tree might no longer meet the heap property.
And so we have to fix the tree,
and that's a process known as heapify.
Heapifying the tree, it's the process of converting
a binary tree into a heap,
and we have to do this after inserting a node,
and we also have to do it after deleting a node.
Because after we've deleted a node,
it's possible that the heap property will no longer be met.
Now, one important thing to note
is there's no required ordering between siblings,
so when you have nodes at the same level,
they don't have to be in ascending or descending order,
anything like that.
The important relationship when it comes to heaps
is the relative values between parents and children.
In a max heap, the parent has to have a value greater
than equal to its children,
and in a min heap the parent has to have a value less than
or equal to its children.
So, here's a tree, and this is not a heap.
Now, why isn't it a heap?
Well, it actually fails two requirements.
First of all, it's not a complete tree.
If it was a complete tree, 14 would have to be 22's child,
because remember in a complete tree,
every level has to be full, except the last one,
and if the last one isn't full, the children have
to be as far to the left as possible.
So here we can see level two is not full,
because 22's missing a child,
and so this is not a heap for that reason.
But it's also not a heap because it doesn't meet
the parent-child value relationships.
It's not a max heap because in a max heap
the parent always has a value greater than or equal
to its children, and 15 is less than 22,
and it's not a min heap because in a min heap
the parent always has a value less than or equal
to its children, and 22 is greater than 19
and 18 is greater than 14.
Four is greater than three, and so this is not a heap.
It's not a complete binary tree
and it doesn't meet the heap requirement
when it comes to the relative values
between the parent and the children.
Okay?
This isn't a heap either,
this one actually meets the requirements of a max heap
as far as the relative values go,
so 22 is greater than 19, 19 is greater than three,
22 is greater than 18, 18 is greater than 15 and 14,
and 15 is greater than four,
but it's not a complete binary tree.
19 is missing a child, and so this is not a heap.
This one is a heap.
It's a complete binary tree because every level is full,
except the last one, and on the last level the child
is the farthest to the left that it can be.
And it's a max heap because every parent has a value
that is greater than or equal to its child.
So we have 22, 19, 15 and 12.
And 19 is greater than three,
18 is greater than 14 and four.
Now, one interesting characteristic of a max heap
is if you travel from the root down to all the leaves,
all the values along the path are in descending order.
And of course the opposite would be true
if you start at a leaf and travelled up to the root,
all of the values along the path
would be in ascending order.
If you want to check whether something's a heap,
just try to find a path for which that isn't true.
So if you were checking if this was a max heap,
you'd say, well if I travel down to every leaf,
all the values along each path should be
in descending order.
If they're not, then it's not a heap.
Or, you could start at the leaves and travel up to the root,
in which case they'd be in ascending order.
And of course, the opposite would be true for a min heap.
For a min heap, where the value of the parent
has to be less than or equal to its children,
travelling from the root down to the leaves,
all of the paths would be in ascending order
and if you start at a leaf and travel up to the root,
all of the paths would be in descending order.
And so this is a heap,
the path down to 12 is 22, 19, 15 and 12,
so that's descending.
22, 19 and three takes us to three.
22, 18 and 14 takes us to 14.
And 22, 18 and four takes us to four.
So, the maximum value in this tree, in this heap,
is at the root.
And so if we wanted to get the maximum value,
we just look at the root
and that's a constant time operation.
And that's why min and max heaps exist.
And you'll see a specific use of a max heap
in a couple of videos.
The way that we often back a heap
is using an array, and we can do that because
you can back complete binary trees using an array
and we'll take a look at how that's done
in the next video.
I'll see you there.